### Recursive self-improvement

Idea: very general memory retrieval system through interaction with our DB, we give the ability to read anything from it through tools

AGI extension: can read and write it’s own source files if it so desires through tools. This is similar to how humans create new tools to extend themselves, i.e. change the interface to the environment.

### Improvement over multiple games

We should use a coding agent to generate endless arc-agi-like games and train on that for ever to improve action efficiency continuously.

- Some kind of simulated self-play a-la hyperagents → construct harder and harder environments / tasks

Learning progress view of how to play the games (OMNI-EPIC)

1. Initial difficulty ranking based on how similar each game is to the public set of 25 (with an LLM)
2. tackle easier games first, we can recompute the ranking after a number of actions are taken

### Rewards

I think the reason curiosity (learning progress) doesn’t work well in practice is that it’s not used in conjunction with realistic environments and realistic constraints on energy expenditure and self-maintenance. The agent cannot get stuck in un-useful but hard to predict places if it is actively pushed toward decay by the environment and has to act in order to counteract this. Can we imbue a notion of self-maintenance into AI playing arc-agi?

Intrinsic learning-progress reward + realistic (human-like) constraints (interfaces, energy, time, memory, maintaining state against entropy increase)

Learning-progress (for exploration) + goal model following + realistic constraints on energy expenditure (no. of actions) + self-maintenance

### Simulation and replay

After each level pause the game and simulate another playthrough with the world model and train the agent (Y) to be perfect on that level which should improve efficiency on next level. We can also give it auxiliary tasks generated by an LLM

Meta-level: Meta-world model which predicts the next level based on current level.

Within-level: Stop after a number of steps and the auxiliary task is to get to the same state, retrain for that in the simulated world model.

### Single VLM

We define a meta-controller which at each timestep selects one of three meta actions:

1. observation → make the VLM ingest an input token (next image patch)
2. action → ingest previous VLM output and sample an action token
3. learning → ingest previous VLM output and sample an imagery token which can be pure hidden state or a language bottleneck token (i.e. standard reasoning).

it is penalized according to the emission of each subsequent token — this provides a notion of time and energy cost.

Regarding sampling we will simply tell the VLM (in the beginning) which actions map to which tokens in its vocabulary and when sampling an action token only sample from the probabilities of those tokens. This makes it fully controlled that we always get a valid action and need a single token. Similarly with imagery tokens, we control what gets sampled, it is not up to the VLM.

### Open questions and issues

How much can we transfer between games?

World model options:

1. Language doc: we can ask an LLM to write this down in natural language and keep it to 1 page max
2. Code for simulating the game
3. VLM itself (V-JEPA 2)

Context length will be a big issue with smaller models so online updating is likely needed

### Architectures

Looped LLMs

Brain inspired → hierarchical recursion and learnable dynamic sparsity

- Transformer that has attention over “previous” layer.
- Transformer where each layer output has a learned router which passes the output to any of ≤ h+1 layers instead of only h+1.

